.TH MACMAINTAIN 1 "April 2026" "macmaintain" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
macmaintain \- Mac maintenance and optimization checker
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B macmaintain
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
A comprehensive read\-only health check tool for macOS that analyzes security, storage, Docker containers, Ollama models, installed language runtimes and SDKs, and unused CLI tools.
.PP
By default, the script performs only read\-only checks and does not modify any data. Use \fB\-\-prune\-docker\fR for interactive Docker cleanup.
.PP
Use \fB\-o\fR or \fB\-\-output\fR to save the generated report as a Markdown file in the current directory with the pattern \fBmacmaintain_check_[date-time].md\fR.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show this help message and exit.
.TP
.BR \-o ", " \-\-output
Save the report as a Markdown file in the current directory.
.TP
.BR \-\-prune\-docker
Perform interactive Docker system prune (removes unused images, containers, volumes).
.SH CHECKS PERFORMED
.TP
.B Security & Vulnerabilities
macOS updates, Firewall, SIP (System Integrity Protection), Gatekeeper, FileVault encryption.
.TP
.B Cache & Temporary Data
System caches, Xcode derived data, npm, Gradle, Maven, Cargo, Docker, Ollama storage.
.TP
.B Docker Analysis
Images, containers, volumes, and disk usage.
.TP
.B Ollama Models
Local models, running instances, storage locations.
.TP
.B Performance & System Health
Uptime analysis, disk space warnings.
.TP
.B Language Runtimes & SDKs
Installed developer runtimes and SDKs found in PATH, including version output, install path, and common uninstall guidance.
.TP
.B Unused CLI Tools
Binaries not accessed in >1 year with removal commands (supports Homebrew, NPM, Cargo, Ruby Gems, pipx, macOS Pkgs).
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Run basic health check:
.B macmaintain
.TP
Run and save a Markdown report:
.B macmaintain \-\-output
.TP
Run with Docker cleanup option:
.B macmaintain \-\-prune\-docker
.TP
Get help:
.B macmaintain \-\-help
.SH FILES
.TP
.B ~/Library/Caches
User caches
.TP
.B ~/Library/Developer/Xcode/DerivedData
Xcode build artifacts
.TP
.B ~/.docker
Docker Desktop configuration
.TP
.B ~/.ollama
Ollama models and cache
.SH NOTES
.IP \(bu 3
Cloud storage directories (Google Drive, OneDrive, Dropbox) are automatically ignored.
.IP \(bu 3
macOS does not strictly log file access times, so unused CLI tool detection is an estimation.
.IP \(bu 3
No data is modified unless \fB\-\-prune\-docker\fR is used with confirmation.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR docker (1),
.BR ollama (1),
.BR brew (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Written by pdnhan <pdnhan@users.noreply.github.com>
.SH REPORTING BUGS
Report bugs at https://github.com/pdnhan/mac-maintenance-script/issues
.SH LICENSE
MIT License
